Sharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin
Sharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & MedicinSharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the rays. However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as Cladoselache and Xenacanthus, as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.

Under this broader definition, the earliest known sharks date back to more than 420 million years ago.[3] Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole. Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species. They range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species of only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.[4] Sharks are found in all seas and are common to depths of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.[5] Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.[6]

Well-known species such as the tiger shark, blue shark, great white shark, mako shark, thresher shark, and hammerhead shark are apex predators〞organisms at the top of their underwater food chain. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing.[7]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	Evolutionary history
2.1	Taxonomy
3	Anatomy
3.1	Teeth
3.2	Skeleton
3.3	Jaw
3.4	Fins
3.5	Dermal denticles
3.6	Tails
4	Physiology
4.1	Buoyancy
4.2	Respiration
4.3	Thermoregulation
4.4	Osmoregulation
4.5	Digestion
4.6	Fluoresence
5	Senses
5.1	Smell
5.2	Sight
5.3	Hearing
5.4	Electroreception
5.5	Lateral line
6	Life history
6.1	Reproduction
6.1.1	Sexual
6.1.2	Asexual
6.2	Brooding
6.2.1	Ovoviviparity
6.2.2	Oviparity
6.2.3	Viviparity
7	Behavior
7.1	Speed
7.2	Intelligence
7.3	Sleep
8	Ecology
8.1	Feeding
8.2	Range and habitat
9	Relationship with humans
9.1	Attacks
9.2	In captivity
9.3	In culture
9.3.1	In Hawaii
9.3.2	In American Samoa
9.3.3	In popular culture
9.3.4	Popular misconceptions
10	Threats to sharks
10.1	Fishery
10.2	Shark culling
10.3	Other threats
11	Conservation
12	See also
13	References
14	Further reading
Etymology
Until the 16th century,[8] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".[9] This is still evidential in several species termed "dogfish," or the porbeagle.

The etymology of the word "shark" is uncertain, the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning "villain, scoundrel" (cf. card shark, loan shark, etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.[10]

A now disproven[original research?] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xok (pronounced 'shok'), meaning "fish".[11] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted "sharke" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.[12][original research?]

Evolutionary history
Photo of dozens of yellowish fossilized teeth, the teeth are of various sizes and are spread out randomly on a flat black surface.
A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth
See also: Evolution of fish
Evidence for the existence of sharks dates from the Ordovician period, 450每420 million years ago, before land vertebrates existed and before a variety of plants had colonized the continents.[3] Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.[13] The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.[13] The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.[14] At this time the most common shark tooth is the cladodont, a style of thin tooth with three tines like a trident, apparently to help catch fish. The majority of modern sharks can be traced back to around 100 million years ago.[15] Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers. Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered. Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils. The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite. When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms. Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.

Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is Cladoselache, from about 370 million years ago,[14] which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. At that point in Earth's history these rocks made up the soft bottom sediments of a large, shallow ocean, which stretched across much of North America. Cladoselache was only about 1 metre (3.3 ft) long with stiff triangular fins and slender jaws.[14] Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use. From the small number of teeth found together, it is most likely that Cladoselache did not replace its teeth as regularly as modern sharks. Its caudal fins had a similar shape to the great white sharks and the pelagic shortfin and longfin makos. The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.

Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups. The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.[16][17] By the time this group became extinct about 220 million years ago, they had spread worldwide. The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.[citation needed] The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well preserved 325-million-year-old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.[18]

Drawing comparing sizes of megalodon, great white shark and a man, megalodon is 18 m long and great white 6 m.
Megalodon (top two, estimated maximum and conservative sizes) with the whale shark, great white shark, and a human for scale
Modern sharks began to appear about 100 million years ago.[15] Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous. One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.[19] The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs. In early white shark evolution there are at least two lineages: one lineage is of white sharks with coarsely serrated teeth and it probably gave rise to the modern great white shark, and another lineage is of white sharks with finely serrated teeth. These sharks attained gigantic proportions and include the extinct megatoothed shark, C. megalodon. Like most extinct sharks, C. megalodon is also primarily known from its fossil teeth and vertebrae. This giant shark reached a total length (TL) of more than 16 metres (52 ft).[20][21] C. megalodon may have approached a maxima of 20.3 metres (67 ft) in total length and 103 metric tons (114 short tons) in mass.[22] Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.[22]

Taxonomy
Branching diagram listing distinguishing characteristics, including mouth, snout, fin spines, etc.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks,[23] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.[24][25]

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose both families to be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.[23][26]

There are more than 470 species of sharks split across twelve orders, including four orders of sharks that have gone extinct:[26]

Carcharhiniformes: Commonly known as ground sharks, the order includes the blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks) along with the houndsharks, catsharks, and hammerhead sharks. They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.
Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Hexanchiformes: Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks, which somewhat resembles a marine snake.
Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks. They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon, Carcharodon megalodon.
Orectolobiformes: They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks, including zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark.
Pristiophoriformes: These are the sawsharks, with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.
Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
Squatiniformes: Also known as angel sharks, they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates.
? Cladoselachiformes
? Hybodontiformes
? Symmoriida
? Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
Anatomy
Drawing of a shark labeling major anatomical features, including mouth, snout, nostril, eye, spiracle, dorsal fin spine, caudal keel, clasper, labial furrows, gill openings, precaudal pit and fins: first and second dorsal, anal, pectoral, caudal and pelvic
General anatomical features of sharks
Main article: Shark anatomy
Teeth
Main article: Shark tooth
The serrated teeth of a tiger shark, used for sawing through flesh
The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.[27]

Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.[28]

Skeleton
Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.[29] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.[30]

Jaw
The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.[31] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.[29] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

Fins
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.[32] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.[30]

Dermal denticles
Further information: Fish scale ∫ Placoid scales
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark
The dermal denticles of a lemon shark, viewed through a scanning electron microscope
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.[33] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.[34]

Tails
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.[35]

Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.[36] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology
Buoyancy
Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.[33] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.[37] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.[38]

Respiration
Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom每dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.[28] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.[39][40]

The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta artery where it branches into afferent brachial arteries. Reoxygenation takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent brachial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.[41]

Thermoregulation
Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.[42]

Osmoregulation
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth,[43] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%[44]) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.[37] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.[45][46]

Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine doesn't contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.[47]

Digestion
Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.[48] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.[49]

One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.[48]

Fluoresence
A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.[50]

Senses
Smell
Eyelevel photo of hammerhead from the front
The shape of the hammerhead shark's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.
Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.[51] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.[52] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.[52] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.[52] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.[53]

Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.[54] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight

Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark (Hexanchus nakamurai)
Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important. Presumably, the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.[55] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.[56] [57][58]

Hearing
Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.[59] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Drawing of shark head.
Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark
Electroreception
Main article: Electroreception
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.[60] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.[61]

Lateral line
Main article: Lateral line
This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.[62] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.[63]

Life history
Photo showing claspers of bottom-resting shark.
The claspers of male spotted wobbegong

Shark egg
Photo of 12 centimetres (4.7 in) egg case adjacent to ruler, the egg case is a brown ovalish shape, with a spiral band running around it from top to bottom.
The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark
Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.[64] Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) may also live over 100 years.[65] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ㊣ 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.[66][67]

Reproduction
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.[68] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13每15.[69]

Sexual
Sharks practice internal fertilization.[70] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.[71]

Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.[72] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.[71]

Asexual
There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis.[73][74] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.[75]

Brooding
Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.[76][77]

Ovoviviparity
Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy, where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.[76]

Oviparity
Some species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse. Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.[76][78]

Viviparity
Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.[79] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.[79] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.[79] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous.[68][76]

Behavior
The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.[80] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.[81] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California.[37] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.[68]

When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.[82]

Speed
In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).[83] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.[84]

Intelligence
Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds,[85] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.[86][87]

There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.[88]

Sleep
All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them[89] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.[89] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.[90]

Ecology
Feeding
This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting.
Most sharks are carnivorous.[91] Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers〞long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve〞analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.[91]

Photo of great white on surface with open jaws revealing meal.
Unlike many other sharks, the great white shark is not actually an apex predator in all of its natural environments, as it is sometimes hunted by orcas
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.[37]

Some seabed每dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.[92] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.

Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.[93]

Range and habitat
Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.[94] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).[95]

Relationship with humans
Attacks
Photo of sign.
A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock, South Africa
Photo of snorkeler with shark in shallow water.
Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark. In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.
Main article: Shark attack
In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.[96]

Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.[97][98] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.[99]

The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series. Jaws author Peter Benchley, as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.[100]

To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.[101]

In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.[102][103]

In captivity
Main article: Sharks in captivity
Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.[104] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Photo showing visitors in shadow watching whale shark in front of many other fish.
A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.[105] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.[105] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.[105] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.[105]

In culture
In Hawaii
Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.[106]

Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele,[107] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.[108][109] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa
On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (Laumei ma Malie) which is important in Samoan culture 〞 the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie, in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.[110][111][112] According to the U.S. National Park Service, "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call."[110]

In popular culture
Main article: Sharks in popular culture
In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.[113] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels.[114] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea, The Reef, and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw, and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich谷d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.[citation needed]

Popular misconceptions
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.[115][116] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.[117] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer[118] and treat osteoarthritis.[119] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.[120]

Threats to sharks
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
Graph of shark catch from 1950, linear growth from less than 200,000 tons per year in 1950 to about 500,000 in 2011
The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.
Photo of shark fin soup in bowl with Chinese spoon
The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup
Photo of suspended tiger shark next to four men.
A 14-foot (4.3 m), 1,200-pound (540 kg) tiger shark caught in K芋ne'ohe Bay, Oahu in 1966
Fishery
In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.[121][122] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.[7]

Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.[123][124] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,[citation needed] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h芍karl.[125] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.[126]

Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.[122] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.[127] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.[128] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.[124] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.[129] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.[126] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005每2007 and 2012每2014.[130]

Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.[131] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.[132] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegegerative diseases such as, ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.

Sharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.[133] However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.[70] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).[70]

The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.[38] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded〞some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20每30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.[134] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.[135][136]

Shark culling
Main article: Shark culling
In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines,[137] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.[138] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.[139] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.[140] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).[141]

From 1962 to the present,[142] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a "shark control" program〞this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks.[143][144][145][146] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".[146] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef.[147] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.[148]

The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets.[145][149] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.[150] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales 〞 also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks.[151] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.[148]

Kwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines〞these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.[152] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program 〞 during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.[152] Authorities on the French island of R谷union kill about 100 sharks per year.[153]

Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.[154][155] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans."[156]

George H. Burgess, the former[157] director of the International Shark Attack File, "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else";[158] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions."[158] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety."[159]

Other threats
Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.[160] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.[161]

Conservation
Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary
In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species[162] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its "shark control" program in eastern South Africa).[152]

Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.[163] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins. In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.[164] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.[165][166]

In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.[167] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.[168]

In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.[169][170]

In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.[171][172] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.[173]

In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.[174] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.[175]

Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S territories in providing legal protection to sharks.[176]

In the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.[177][178]

Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing 〞 these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.[179][180][181]

In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.[182][183]

In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.[184][185] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.

According to a 2021 study in Nature,[186] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered.[187] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.[188]

See also
	Fish portal
icon	Sharks portal
List of sharks
List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera
Osteichthyes
Marine vertebrate
Outline of sharks
Shark meat
References
 "Selachii (shark)". The Paleontological Database (PBDB). Archived from the original on 2018-07-10. Retrieved 2018-07-10.
 | "Selachii (shark) website:onlinelibrary.wiley.com".
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Geologic Time". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019). "Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays". Evolution. 73 (2): 588每599. doi:10.1111/evo.13680. PMID 30675721. S2CID 59224442.
 Allen, Thomas B. (1999). The Shark Almanac. New York: The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5. OCLC 39627633.
 Budker, Paul (1971). The Life of Sharks. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. SBN 297003070.
 Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021). "Shark Populations Are Crashing, With a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2021.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 Marx, Robert F. (1990). The History of Underwater Exploration. Courier Dover Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5.
 Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.
 Jones, Tom. "The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter". Archived from the original on 2008-11-21. Retrieved 2009-07-11.
 "Shark". Middle English Dictionary. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 2013-08-20. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Earliest Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2008-12-23. Retrieved 2009-02-10.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Ancient Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2012-12-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Origin of Modern Sharks". ReefQuest. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18. Retrieved 2006-09-09.
 "Xenacanth" Archived 2007-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Hooper Virtual Natural History Museum. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 "Biology of Sharks and Rays: 'The Earliest Sharks'" Archived 2007-03-02 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 11/26/06.
 Pradel, A.; Maisey, J. G.; Tafforeau, P.; Mapes, R. H.; Mallatt, J. (2014). "A Palaeozoic shark with osteichthyan-like branchial arches". Nature. 509 (7502): 608每611. Bibcode:2014Natur.509..608P. doi:10.1038/nature13195. PMID 24739974. S2CID 3504437.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Rise of Modern Sharks". Archived from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Klimley, Peter; Ainley, David (1996). Great White Sharks: The Biology of Carcharodon carcharias. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-415031-7.
 Pimiento, Catalina; Dana J. Ehret; Bruce J. MacFadden; Gordon Hubbell (May 10, 2010). Stepanova, Anna (ed.). "Ancient Nursery Area for the Extinct Giant Shark Megalodon from the Miocene of Panama". PLOS ONE. 5 (5): e10552. Bibcode:2010PLoSO...510552P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010552. PMC 2866656. PMID 20479893.
 Wroe, S.; Huber, D. R.; Lowry, M.; McHenry, C.; Moreno, K.; Clausen, P.; Ferrara, T. L.; Cunningham, E.; Dean, M. N.; Summers, A. P. (2008). "Three-dimensional computer analysis of white shark jaw mechanics: how hard can a great white bite?". Journal of Zoology. 276 (4): 336每342. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2008.00494.x.
 "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)". FAO. Archived from the original on 2008-08-02. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers". Molecular Biology Reports. 41 (1): 447每457. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6. PMID 24293104. S2CID 16018112.
 Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, Ant車nio; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20). "The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)". Mitochondrial DNA. Part A, DNA Mapping, Sequencing, and Analysis. 29 (6): 867每878. doi:10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052. PMID 28927318. S2CID 3258973.
 "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984". Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28. Retrieved 2009-09-14.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Teeth of the Skin". Archived from the original on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Gilbertson, Lance (1999). Zoology Laboratory Manual. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skeleton in the Corset". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-11-25. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs". Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Hamlett, W. C. (1999f). Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5. OCLC 39217534.
 Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999). Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1 ed.). p 56: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "The Importance of Being Cartilaginous". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Skin of the Teeth". Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 Michael, Bright. "Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Nelson, Joseph S. (1994). Fishes of the World. New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6. OCLC 28965588.
 Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005). Sharks of the World. Collins Field Guides. ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0. OCLC 183136093.
 Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990). Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries. NOAA Tech Rept.
 William J. Bennetta (1996). "Deep Breathing". Archived from the original on 2007-08-14. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Do sharks sleep". Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992). "Fire in the Belly of the Beast". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-09-17. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1172): 329每347. Bibcode:1980RSPSB.208..329G. doi:10.1098/rspb.1980.0054. JSTOR 35431. PMID 6106196. S2CID 38498079.
 "Sharkproject". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 John A. Musick (2005). "Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization". FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Thomas Batten. "MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus". Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2008-03-16.
 Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016). "The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR". Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association. 127: 162每175. PMC 5216465. PMID 28066051.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "No Guts, No Glory". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-11. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017). "Sharks literally puke their guts out 〞 here's why". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019). "Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism". iScience. 19: 1291每1336. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Smell and Taste". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-12-07. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01). "Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes". Brain Structure and Function. 220 (2): 1127每1143. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0. ISSN 1863-2661. PMID 24435575. S2CID 2829434.
 Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20). "A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (29): 12946每12951. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712946Y. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002195107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2919912. PMID 20616012. S2CID 2151639.
 The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187-1191)
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Vision and a Carpet of Light". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds". Archived from the original on 2011-01-24. Retrieved 2011-02-03.
 Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18). "Sharks are probably colour-blind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2011-01-19. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
 Nathan Scott Hart, Susan Michelle Theiss, Blake Kristin Harahush and Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks". Naturwissenschaften. 98 (3): 193每201. Bibcode:2011NW.....98..193H. doi:10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8. PMID 21212930. S2CID 30148811.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Hearing and Vibration Detection". Archived from the original on 2008-05-01. Retrieved 2008-06-01.
 Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes". Science. 218 (4575): 916每8. Bibcode:1982Sci...218..916K. doi:10.1126/science.7134985. PMID 7134985.
 Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005). "Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field". Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2 (2): 129每30. doi:10.1098/rsif.2004.0021. PMC 1578252. PMID 16849172.
 Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009). "Lateral line system of fish". Integrative Zoology. 4 (1): 13每25. doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x. ISSN 1749-4877. PMID 21392273.
 Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line". The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).
 "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes"". Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2012-08-27.
 "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium每Shark Basics"". Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.
 Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12). "Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus)". Science. 353 (6300): 702每704. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..702N. doi:10.1126/science.aaf1703. PMID 27516602. S2CID 206647043.
 Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016). "Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aag0748. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016.
 Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984). Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5. OCLC 156157504.
 Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000). "LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS". Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2010.
 Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life". Center For Ocean Life. Archived from the original on 2018-09-06. Retrieved 2018-09-09.
 Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prod?hl PA (2007). "Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark". Biology Letters. 3 (4): 425每7. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189. PMC 2390672. PMID 17519185.
 In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008
 Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23). "Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say". The New York Times, New York City. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2007-11-13.
 "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG". Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03. Retrieved 2009-09-03.
 Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". Biological Conservation. 217: 11每27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010. Archived from the original on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2018-11-24.
 "Marine Biology notes". School of Life Sciences, Napier University. Archived from the original on 2003-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012). Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition. Taylor & Francis Group.
 The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent
 Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07). "Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip". Guardian Unlimited. London. Retrieved 2006-09-17.
 Richard H. Johnson & Donald R. Nelson (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah, and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man". Copeia. 1973 (1): 76每84. doi:10.2307/1442360. JSTOR 1442360.
 Reefquest Center for Shark Research. What's the Speediest Marine Creature? Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
 The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser, 3 March 2012.
 Kathreen E. Ruckstuhl; Peter Neuhaus, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks". Sexual segregation in vertebrates. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0.
 "Is the White Shark Intelligent". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Biology of the Porbeagle". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 Guttridge, T.L., van Dijk, S., Stamhuis, E.J., Krause, J., Gruber, S.H. and Brown, C. (2013). "Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris". Animal Cognition. 16 (1): 55每64. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6. PMID 22933179. S2CID 351363. Archived from the original on 2019-04-27. Retrieved 2019-09-05.
 "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
 "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time". NPR. 6 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2019.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Building a Better Mouth Trap". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2009-08-22.
 Martin, R. Aidan. "Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks〞39 species". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Stevens 1987
 "Carcharhinus leucas". University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006). "The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1592): 1435每41. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3461. PMC 1560292. PMID 16777734.
 "Worldwide shark attack summary". International Shark Attack File. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18. Retrieved 2007-08-28.
 "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark". ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24. Retrieved 2006-09-12.
 "Biology of sharks and rays". ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. Retrieved 2014-01-17.
 Buttigieg, Alex. "The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor". Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002). "Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?". News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2013-09-07.
 The real reasons why sharks attack humans, By Richard Gray, 8th August 2019.
 Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence, by Blake K.Chapman Daryl McPhee. September 16, 2016. sciencedirect.com.
 "Whale Sharks in Captivity". Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home". Aquarium Fish Magazine. pp. 20每29.
 Beckwith, Martha (1940). "Guardian Gods". Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
 "Pele, Goddess of Fire". Archived from the original on 2006-09-01. Retrieved 2006-09-13.
 "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island". Archived from the original on September 18, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2009.
 Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993). Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2.
 https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/places/pdfs/14000925.pdf Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa). Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 https://ryanwoodwardart.com/my-works/the-turtle-and-the-shark/ Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Ryanwoodwardart.com. The Turtle And The Shark. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.janesoceania.com/samoa_legends/index.htm Archived 2018-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Janesocienia.coam. Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 Crawford, Dean (2008). Shark. Reaktion Books. pp. 47每55. ISBN 978-1861893253.
 J?n, A. Asbj?rn; Aich, Raj S. (2015). "Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand". Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).
 Finkelstein JB (2005). "Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 97 (21): 1562每3. doi:10.1093/jnci/dji392. PMID 16264172.
 Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004). "Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience". Cancer Research. 64 (23): 8485每91. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260. PMID 15574750.
 "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24. Retrieved 2006-09-08.
 "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-23.
 Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007). "Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy". New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago. Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo. "Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will". Retrieved 2008-06-23.[dead link]
 HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?". Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
 "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem〞CNN.com". CNN. 2008-12-15. Archived from the original on 2010-03-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks". Marine Policy. 40: 194每204. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034.
 Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014). "Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays". eLife. 3: e00590. doi:10.7554/eLife.00590. PMC 3897121. PMID 24448405. eLife 2014;3:e00590
 Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012). "You eat that?". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
 Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006). "38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-02.
 [1] Archived August 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
 Ask your senator to support the Shark Conservation Act
 "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu". New York Times. Associated Press. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved June 2010. Check date values in: |access-date= (help) Research exemptions are available.
 "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC". www.traffic.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-10. Retrieved 2019-01-10.
 Kiyo Mondo; Neil Hammerschlag; Margaret Basile; John Pablo; Sandra A. Banack; Deborah C. Mash (2012). "Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin 汕-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins". Marine Drugs. 10 (2): 509每520. doi:10.3390/md10020509. PMC 3297012. PMID 22412816.
 "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern". Science Daily. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-09-06.
 Walker, T.I. (1998). Shark Fisheries Management and Biology.
 France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24). "One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction". Archived from the original on 2014-01-26. Retrieved 2014-01-24.
 Morales, Alex. "Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
 Brown, Sophie. "Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program - CNN.com". Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014). "WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015). "Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://thewest.com.au/news/sharks/premier-mark-mcgowans-shark-plan-not-enough-to-protect-us-ng-b88448984z Archived 2018-09-09 at the Wayback Machine "Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us". The West Australian. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
 http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-14/shark-attacks-prompt-wa-to-conduct-smart-drum-line-trial/10117230 Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn. August 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 "Queensland - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Subscribe - theaustralian". Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 "Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 http://www.sealifetrust.org.au/news/latest/shark-nets-australia-work Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Shark nets in Australia 每 what are they and how do they work? Sealifetrust.org.au. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.ntd.tv/2018/09/04/video-endangered-hammerhead-sharks-dead-on-drum-line-in-great-barrier-reef/ Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef. Jack Phillips. Ntd.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/queensland-government-kills-sharks-faces-court-challenge Archived 2018-09-04 at the Wayback Machine
"Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge". maritime-exeecutive.com. September 4, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 https://www.news.com.au/technology/science/animals/aussie-shark-population-is-staggering-decline/news-story/49e910c828b6e2b735d1c68e6b2c956e Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au. Aussie shark population in staggering decline. Rhian Deutrom. December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "New South Wales - Overview". www.seashepherd.org.au. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016.
 https://www.buzzfeed.com/elfyscott/heres-what-you-need-to-know-about-australias-smart-drum Archived 2018-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks. Elfy Scott. July 5, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018.
 https://www.marineconservation.org.au/pages/shark-culling.html Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Shark Culling". marineconservation.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.sharkangels.org/index.php/media/news/157-shark-nets Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine Sharkangels.org. Shark nets. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
 https://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=11847758 Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion". nzherald.co.nz. April 30, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2018
 http://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/sharks-how-a-cull-could-ruin-an-ecosystem Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem. Alana Schetzer. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/no-shark-cull-why-some-surfers-don-t-want-kill-n748141 Archived 2018-08-06 at the Wayback Machine NBC News.No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks. Chloe Hubbard. April 30, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://hsi.org.au/blog/2016/12/08/shark-nets-death-traps-for-marine-animals/ Archived 2018-10-02 at the Wayback Machine Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016). "Shark Nets 每 Death Traps For Marine Animals". hsi.org.au. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
 http://www.southcoasttoday.com/news/20181008/expert-shark-threat-always-going-to-be-problem-for-cape-cod Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod. Doug Fraser. October 8, 2018. Cape Cod Times. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
https://www.thestar.com/news/stardispatches/2014/06/16/how_to_swim_with_sharks_and_not_get_eaten.html Archived 2018-09-19 at the Wayback Machine How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten. Sandro Contenta. Thestar.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
 https://theconversation.com/mike-baird-is-right-culling-sharks-doesnt-work-heres-what-we-can-do-instead-46195 Archived 2019-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Theconversation.com. Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn＊t work 每 here＊s what we can do instead. Jane Williamson. August 17, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2018.
 "The Greatest Threats to Sharks". Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.
 "White Shark Trust - Conservation". Greatwhiteshark.co.za. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2012-06-15.
 "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2000-12-21. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine, 520 F.3d 976, (9th Cir., 2008).
 "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions". THOMAS. Library of Congress. 2011-01-04. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2012.
 Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States. Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16. Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
 "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels". European Union. 26 June 2003. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 Sep 2014.
 Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007). "The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF). Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop. Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group. ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
 Jha, Alok (2009-06-25). "Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06. Retrieved 2009-07-16.
 Jolly, David (2010-03-23). "U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. Retrieved 2017-02-23.
 "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection". Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.
 MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013). "'Historic' day for shark protection". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list". Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-09-23.
 "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF). July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18. Retrieved 2009-08-29.
 "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans". The Humane Society of the United States. 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
 Millward, Susan. "Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup". Animal Welfare Institute. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019). "Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states〞but it's still on the menu". National Geographic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019.
 http://www.sharksavers.org/en/our-programs/shark-sanctuaries/learn-more/laws-protecting-sharks Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Laws Protecting Sharks. Sharksavers.org. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/04/pacific-islands-band-together-on-a-shark-sanctuary/ Archived 2018-09-03 at the Wayback Machine Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary. Joanna M. Foster. New York Times. August 4, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
 Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016). "Palau vs. the Poachers". The New York Times.
 "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific". phys.org. Retrieved 17 May 2020.
 Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark". Animal Conservation. n/a (n/a). doi:10.1111/acv.12585.
 "Sharks almost gone from many reefs". phys.org. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amarg車s, Fabi芍n; Angulo-Vald谷s, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura Garc赤a; Beaufort, Oc谷ane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020). "Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks". Nature. 583 (7818): 801每806. Bibcode:2020Natur.583..801M. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y. hdl:10754/664495. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32699418. S2CID 220696105. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
 Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays". Nature. 589 (7843): 567每571. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9.
 Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021). "Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays". BBC News. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
 Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021). "Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2021.
General references
Castro, Jose (1983). The Sharks of North American Waters. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8. OCLC 183037060.
Stevens, John D. (1987). Sharks. New York: NY Facts on File Publications. ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0. OCLC 15163749.
Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005). Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3. OCLC 54822028.
Clover, Charles (2004). The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2.
Owen, David (2009). Shark: In Peril in the Sea. New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4.
Further reading
Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources, pages 245每254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome. ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9.
Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites National Geographic, 28 October 2010.
	Wikispecies has information related to Selachimorpha.
	The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Selachimorpha
93 million years ago, bizarre, winged sharks swam in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This newly described fossil species, called Aquilolamna milarcae, has allowed its discoverers to erect a new family. Like manta rays, these 'eagle sharks' are characterised by extremely long and thin pectoral fins reminiscent of wings. The specimen studied was 1.65 metres long and had a span of 1.90 metres.

Aquilolamna milarcae had a caudal fin with a well-developed superior lobe, typical of most pelagic sharks, such as whale sharks and tiger sharks. Thus, its anatomical features thus give it a chimeric appearance that combines both sharks and rays.

With its large mouth and supposed very small teeth, it must have fed on plankton, according to the international research team led by Romain Vullo of the CNRS.

Scientists have identified only one category of large plankton feeders in Cretaceous seasuntil now: a group of large bony fish (pachycormidae), which is now extinct. Thanks to this discovery, they now know that a second group, the eagle sharks, was also present in the Cretaceous oceans.

The complete specimen was found in 2012 in Vallecillo (Mexico), a locality yielding remarkably preserved fossils. This site, already famous for its many fossils of ammonites, bony fish and other marine reptiles, is most useful for documenting the evolution of oceanic animals.

As well as shedding light on the structure of Cretaceous marine ecosystems, the discovery of eagle sharks reveals a new, hitherto unsuspected, facet of sharks' evolutionary history.

Story Source:

Materials provided by CNRS. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Romain Vullo, Eberhard Frey, Christina Ifrim, Margarito A. Gonz芍lez Gonz芍lez, Eva S. Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck. Manta-like planktivorous sharks in Late Cretaceous oceans. Science, 2021 DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1490
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
CNRS. "Discovery of a 'winged' shark in the Cretaceous seas." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210318142442.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
With a total length of up to 5.5m, the tiger shark is one of the largest predatory sharks known today. This shark is a cosmopolitan species occurring in all oceans worldwide. It is characterized by a striped pattern on its back, which is well marked in juveniles but usually fades in adults.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna examined the fossil record of these apex predators and found out that modern tiger sharks are older than previously thought and that several tiger shark species existed in past compared to the single species living today. The results of this study are published in the journal Paleobiology.

The fossil history of modern sharks reaches back to the Permian, about 295 million years ago. Complete fossil shark skeletons are very rare -- the skeleton, which consists almost entirely of cartilage, is only preserved under very special circumstances during the fossilization processes. Due to the lifelong continuous tooth replacement, most extinct sharks are therefore only known by their well-mineralized teeth, which, nonetheless, can provide deep insights into their evolutionary history.

The teeth of the modern tiger shark are unique: they have a broad, double-serrated cutting edge which even allows them to cut through sea turtle shells with ease. Tiger shark teeth are known in the fossil record since about 56 million years. Based on these fossil teeth, over 22 extinct tiger shark species have been described.

An international team of researchers led by Julia T邦rtscher from the University of Vienna has now examined the fossil history of the tiger shark and its extinct relatives. With the help of geometric morphometrics, the scientists were able to show that only 5 of the 22 known fossil tiger sharks actually represent valid species. Nevertheless, tiger sharks were more diverse in the past and only a single species survived until today.

Another intriguing detail in the tiger shark fossil record emerged during this study. Up to now, it was assumed that the modern tiger shark originated ca. 5.3 million years ago. The team, however, was able to identify several 13.8 million year old fossil teeth as belonging to this shark demonstrating that it originated much earlier than previously assumed.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Julia T邦rtscher, Faviel A. L車pez-Romero, Patrick L. Jambura, Ren谷 Kindlimann, David J. Ward, J邦rgen Kriwet. Evolution, diversity, and disparity of the tiger shark lineage Galeocerdo in deep time. Paleobiology, 2021; 1 DOI: 10.1017/pab.2021.6
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Older than expected: Teeth reveal the origin of the tiger shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 24 March 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/03/210324094723.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
New Species
Wild Animals
Fossils & Ruins
Fossils
Paleontology
Dinosaurs
Early Mammals
advertisement
Scientists have confirmed the second-ever case of a ※virgin birth§ in a shark, indicating once again that female sharks can reproduce without mating and raising the possibility that many female sharks have this incredible capacity.

Lead author Dr. Demian Chapman, shark scientist with the Institute for Ocean Conservation Science at Stony Brook University, Beth Firchau, Curator of Fishes for the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center, and Dr. Mahmood Shivji, Director of the Guy Harvey Research Institute and Professor at Nova Southeastern University in Florida, have proven through DNA testing that the offspring of a female blacktip shark named ※Tidbit§ contained no genetic material from a father. Tidbit had lived at the Virginia Aquarium in the Norfolk Canyon Aquarium for eight years since shortly after her birth in the wild.

In May 2007, Chapman and Shivji were part of a team that made the groundbreaking scientific discovery confirming -每 for the first time ever -- a virgin birth in a female shark. That shark was a hammerhead residing at an Omaha, Nebraska zoo and had not been in contact with male sharks for at least three years. That study was published in the journal Biology Letters and captured global media and scientific attention. The DNA-fingerprinting techniques used to prove both cases of virgin birth (scientifically known as ※parthenogenesis§) are identical to those used in human paternity testing.

※It is now clear that parthenogenesis occurs in sharks other than just hammerheads,§ Chapman said. ※The first case was no fluke. It is quite possible that this is something female sharks of many species can do on occasion.§

Sharks＊ ability to reproduce alone should not be viewed as an adequate replacement for normal sexual reproduction, Chapman cautioned. For one, the blacktip and hammerhead sharks that reproduced without mating both only produced one pup, rather than an entire litter. Shark litters can contain anywhere from a few to more than a hundred shark pups, depending upon the species. ※The revelation that female sharks can reproduce alone shouldn＊t stop us from worrying about driving shark populations to very low levels through overfishing,§ said Chapman. ※It is very unlikely that a small number of female survivors could build their numbers up very quickly by undergoing virgin birth.§

Tidbit was an Atlantic blacktip shark whom Virginia Aquarium biologists believe had only just reached sexual maturity.

※We have never observed her in reproductive behavior or showing typical signs of having been bred,§ said Firchau. Scientists did not even know that Tidbit was pregnant until after she unfortunately died and an autopsy (called a necropsy for animals) was performed. ※Sadness turned to surprise during the necropsy when we found that she was pregnant,§ Firchau said. ※There were no male blacktips in the tank for the past eight years!§

The phenomenon of ※virgin birth§ occurs when a baby is conceived without male sperm having first fertilized the female＊s eggs, and has been proven in some bony fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In the type of parthenogenesis seen in these sharks, known as automictic parthenogenesis, the newly forming pup acquires one set of chromosomes when the mother's chromosomes split during egg development. But instead of uniting with similarly split chromosomes from sperm, as occurs in sexual reproduction, the mother＊s set is paired with a copy of itself. This results in offspring of reduced genetic diversity who may be at a disadvantage for surviving in the wild.

※The finding of parthenogenesis in blacktip sharks, which are close relatives of some of the larger predatory sharks in the ocean including the tiger, bull and dusky sharks, raises intriguing questions about how frequently parthenogenesis may occur in the wild in this group of heavily fished sharks,§ said Shivji. ※It is possible that parthenogenesis could become more common in these sharks if population densities become so low that females have trouble finding mates.§ Populations of all of these sharks have declined in the past twenty years due to overexploitation, mainly to supply the shark fin markets.

There have been nearly a dozen reports of suspected virgin births in sharks in recent years, but scientists largely assumed these cases were the result of long-term sperm storage by females after mating with males. Virgin birth is now the more probable explanation, and DNA testing is underway to confirm it in additional sharks. Chapman is currently analyzing the DNA of yet another shark species with Dr. Kevin Feldheim of the Field Museum in Chicago.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Stony Brook University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Chapman et al. Parthenogenesis in a large-bodied requiem shark, the blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus. Journal of Fish Biology, 2008; 73 (6): 1473 DOI: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.02018.x
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Stony Brook University. "'Virgin Birth' By Shark Confirmed: Second Case Ever." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 11 October 2008. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081010173054.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, an international research team led by Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna describes an exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of the ancient shark Asteracanthus. This extremely rare fossil find comes from the famous Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, which was formed in a tropical-subtropical lagoon landscape during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago. The almost complete skeleton shows that Asteracanthus was two-and-a-half meters long in life, which makes this ancient shark one of the largest of its time. The study is published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology.

Cartilaginous fishes, which include sharks and rays, are one of the most successful vertebrate groups still alive today. Due to their life-long tooth replacement, teeth of cartilaginous fishes are among the most common fossil vertebrate finds. However, the low preservation potential of their cartilaginous skeletons prevents fossilization of completely preserved specimens in most cases. The extremely rare preservation of fossil cartilaginous fish skeletons is therefore linked to special conditions during fossilization and restricted to a few fossil-bearing localities only.

The Solnhofen limestones in Bavaria, Germany, which were formed during the Late Jurassic, about 150 million years ago, is such a rare occurrence. They are world-renowned for having produced skeletons of the small feathered dinosaur Archaeopteryx and have yielded numerous shark and ray skeletons, recovered during excavations over the past 150 years. A new study published in the journal Papers in Palaeontology and led by the paleontologist Sebastian Stumpf from the University of Vienna presents the largest fossil shark skeleton that has ever been discovered in the Solnhofen limestones. The specimen is represented by an almost completely preserved skeleton of the extinct hybodontiform shark Asteracanthus, the total length of which was two-and-a-half meters in life, which made it a giant among Jurassic sharks.

Hybodontiform sharks, which are the closest relatives of modern sharks and rays, first appeared during the latest Devonian, about 361 million years ago, and went extinct together with dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, about 66 million years ago. They had two dorsal fins, each supported by a prominent fin spine. The body size of hybodontiform sharks ranged from a few centimeters to approximately three meters in maximum length, which consequently makes Asteracanthus one of the largest representatives of both its group and its time. In contrast, modern sharks and rays, which were already diverse during the Jurassic, only reached a body size of up to two meters in maximum length in very rare cases.

Asteracanthus was scientifically described more than 180 years ago by the Swiss-American naturalist Louis Agassiz on the basis of isolated fossil dorsal fin spines. However, articulated skeletal remains have never been found -- until now. The dentition of the skeleton is exceptionally well-preserved and contains more than 150 teeth, each with a well-developed central cusp that is accompanied on both sides by several smaller cusplets. "This specialized type of dentition suggests that Asteracanthus was an active predator feeding on a wide range of prey animals. Asteracanthus was certainly not only one of the largest cartilaginous fishes of its time, but also one of the most impressive." says Sebastian Stumpf.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Vienna. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Stumpf, S., L車pez-Romero, F.A., Kindlimann, R., Lacombat, F., Pohl, B. & Kriwet, J. A unique hybodontiform skeleton provides novel insights into Mesozoic chondrichthyan life. Papers in Palaeontology, 2021 DOI: 10.1002/spp2.1350
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Vienna. "Spectacular fossil discovery: 150 million-year-old shark was one of the largest of its time." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 14 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210114111918.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A new study has for the first time explored the rate at which the world's largest fish, the endangered whale shark, can recover from its injuries. The findings reveal that lacerations and abrasions, increasingly caused through collisions with boats, can heal in a matter of weeks and researchers found evidence of partially removed dorsal fins re-growing.

This work, published in the journal Conservation Physiology, comes at a critical time for these large sharks, that can reach lengths of up to 18 metres. Other recent studies have shown that as their popularity within the wildlife tourism sector increases, so do interactions with humans and boat traffic. As a result, these sharks face an additional source of injury on top of natural threats, and some of these ocean giants exhibit scars caused by boat collisions. Until now very little was known about the impact from such injuries and how they can recover.

"These baseline findings provide us with a preliminary understanding of wound healing in this species" says lead author Freya Womersley, a PhD student with University of Southampton based at the Marine Biological Association, UK. "We wanted to determine if there was a way of quantifying what many researchers were anecdotally witnessing in the field, and so we came up with a technique of monitoring and analysing injuries over time."

The unique spot markings of whale sharks allow researchers across the world to identify individuals and monitor regional populations, making use of websites such as WildBook where people can upload photos of their shark sightings. For this study, the research team examined photographs taken by citizen scientists, researchers and the whale shark tourism industry in two sites in the Indian Ocean where the sharks frequently gather, and used these markings to standardise between images. This method allowed the team to compare photographs taken without specialist equipment over time and increased the amount of data available to assess and monitor how individual wounds changed.

"By using our new method, we were able to determine that these sharks can heal from very serious injuries in timeframes of weeks and months" says Freya. "This means that we now have a better understanding of injury and healing dynamics, which can be very important for conservation management."

The study also highlighted whale sharks' capability to re-grow a partially amputated first dorsal fin, which, to the authors' knowledge, is the first time a shark has ever been scientifically reported exhibiting this phenomenon. Of further interest, their unique spot markings were also observed forming over previously injured spots, which suggests that these beautiful markings are an important feature for this species and persist even after being damaged.

These healing capabilities suggest that whale sharks may be resilient to impacts caused by humans, but the authors of this work note that there may be many other less recognisable impacts of injuries to these animals, such as reduced fitness, foraging capacity and altered behaviours; so injuries need to be prevented where possible. They also found variation within healing rates, with lacerations, typical of propeller injuries, taking longer to heal than other kinds of wounds, highlighting the need for further research to determine the influence of environmental and more nuanced individual factors on injury healing.

Careful management of whale shark aggregation sites, which occur seasonally at a number of coastal regions around the world, is essential to ensure the sharks are protected while spending time in areas of high human activity. If sharks are encountered with injuries in these locations, research such as this can help local teams estimate how old the injury is and make assessments about where and how it might have been inflicted based on knowledge of whale shark movements and tendency to return to the same locations.

Recent research published in Nature found that 71% of pelagic sharks have declined over the last 50 years, and highlighted the need to enforce stricter protections for this important group of ocean inhabitants.

Freya concludes, "Whale sharks have been experiencing population declines globally from a variety of threats as a result of human activity. Therefore, it is imperative that we minimise human impacts on whale sharks and protect the species where it is most vulnerable, especially where human-shark interactions are high.

"There is still a long way to go in understanding healing in whale sharks, and in shark species in general, but our team hope that baseline studies such as this one can provide crucial evidence for management decision makers that can be used to safeguard the future of whale sharks."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Southampton. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Freya Womersley, James Hancock, Cameron T Perry, David Rowat. Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management. Conservation Physiology, 2021; 9 (1) DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coaa120
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Southampton. "Whale sharks show remarkable capacity to recover from injuries, including partial fin re-growing." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 23 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210223110500.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Fish
Sea Life
Dolphins and Whales
Nature
Earth & Climate
Environmental Awareness
Ecology
Environmental Policy
Oceanography
advertisement
Some, if not all, early sharks that lived 300 to 400 million years ago not only dropped their lower jaws downward but rotated them outwards when opening their mouths. This enabled them to make the best of their largest, sharpest and inward-facing teeth when catching prey, paleontologists at the Universities of Zurich and Chicago have now shown using CT scanning and 3D printing.

Many modern sharks have row upon row of formidable sharp teeth that constantly regrow and can easily be seen if their mouths are just slightly opened. But this was not always the case. The teeth in the ancestors of today's cartilaginous fish (chondrichthyan), which include sharks, rays and chimaeras, were replaced more slowly. With mouths closed, the older, smaller and worn out teeth of sharks stood upright on the jaw, while the younger and larger teeth pointed towards the tongue and were thus invisible when the mouth was closed.

Jaw reconstruction thanks to computed tomography

Paleontologists at the University of Zurich, the University of Chicago and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden (Netherlands) have now examined the structure and function of this peculiar jaw construction based on a 370-million-year-old chondrichthyan from Morocco. Using computed tomography scans, the researchers were able not only to reconstruct the jaw, but also print it out as a 3D model. This enabled them to simulate and test the jaw's mechanics.

What they discovered in the process was that unlike in humans, the two sides of the lower jaw were not fused in the middle. This enabled the animals to not only drop the jaw halves downward but at the same automatically rotate both outwards. "Through this rotation, the younger, larger and sharper teeth, which usually pointed toward the inside of the mouth, were brought into an upright position. This made it easier for animals to impale their prey," explains first author Linda Frey. "Through an inward rotation, the teeth then pushed the prey deeper into the buccal space when the jaws closed."

Jaw joint widespread in the Paleozoic era

This mechanism not only made sure the larger, inward-facing teeth were used, but also enabled the animals to engage in what is known as suction-feeding. "In combination with the outward movement, the opening of the jaws causes sea water to rush into the oral cavity, while closing them results in a mechanical pull that entraps and immobilizes the prey."

Since cartilaginous skeletons are barely mineralized and generally not that well preserved as fossils, this jaw construction has evaded researchers for a long time. "The excellently preserved fossil we've examined is a unique specimen," says UZH paleontologist and last author Christian Klug. He and his team believe that the described type of jaw joint played an important role in the Paleozoic era. With increasingly frequent tooth replacement, however, it became obsolete over time and was replaced by the often peculiar and more complex jaws of modern-day sharks and rays.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Zurich. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Linda Frey, Michael I. Coates, Kristen Tietjen, Martin R邦cklin, Christian Klug. A symmoriiform from the Late Devonian of Morocco demonstrates a derived jaw function in ancient chondrichthyans. Communications Biology, 2020; 3 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01394-2
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Zurich. "Prehistoric shark hid its largest teeth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 November 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/11/201118141740.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of marine scientists led by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has confirmed that southern Africa's most threatened endemic shark -- the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark (Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum) -- has been found to occur in Mozambique; a finding that represents a range extension of more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles).

Publishing their findings in the journal Marine Biodiversity, the team said that the discovery was based on several records of the shark including underwater video surveys collected in 2019, recent photos of shore-based sport anglers' catches, and the identification of a specimen collected in 1967.

The diminutive shorttail nurse shark reaches lengths of approximately 75 centimeters (30 inches). Owing to its strong association with coral reefs, it is under particular threat from overexploitation by coastal fisheries and habitat degradation, and is suspected to have declined by more than 80 percent over the last 30 years.

The scientists say that the findings expand the species range southward from the coast of Tanzania by some 2,200 kilometers (1,367 miles) and 1,100 kilometers (683 miles) westward from Madagascar across the Mozambique Channel.

One of the records of the shark, from Mozambique's Ponta do Ouro Partial Marine Reserve, suggests that the species benefits from some degree of protection within a large coastal marine protected area (MPA). The authors though warn that the species range within Mozambique may span a large proportion of the country's unprotected coral reef habitat.

Said Rhett Bennett, WCS Shark and Ray Conservation Program Manager, Madagascar & Western Indian Ocean: "The shorttail nurse shark is under threat within much of its Mozambique range. There are no species recovery plans in place for the species and no specific regulations pertaining to its harvest, other than a listing on the Kenya threatened and protected species list."

The authors recommend that the species should be considered for legal protection in Mozambique and throughout its limited range. In addition, they say it should be better monitored, and subject to improved management measures to reduce targeted and incidental catch.

WCS works on shark conservation around the world. The majority of the global trade in both shark fins, and other products such as meat, remains unregulated, pushing many species toward extinction. In 2019, at CITES CoP18, WCS helped lead efforts to expand the protection of sharks from unsustainable trade.

The work was conducted in partnership with the Mozambique Instituto Nacional de Investiga??o Pesqueira, and the South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity.

Aspects of this project were funded by the Shark Conservation Fund, a philanthropic collaborative pooling expertise and resources to meet the threats facing the world's sharks and rays. The Shark Conservation Fund is a project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Wildlife Conservation Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Rhett H. Bennett, David A. Ebert, Jorge J. Sitoe, Stela Fernando, Mark Harris, David van Beuningen, Aseeqah Davids. Range extension of the Critically Endangered shorttail nurse shark Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum (Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae) to include Mozambique, with implications for management. Marine Biodiversity, 2021; 51 (1) DOI: 10.1007/s12526-020-01137-w
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Wildlife Conservation Society. "Southern Africa's most endangered shark just extended its range by 2,000 kilometers." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210126171639.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
A team of researchers, led by international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London), has discovered that sharks are much rarer in habitats nearer large human populations and fish markets. The team also found that the average body size of sharks and other marine predators fell dramatically in these areas, where sharks are caught and killed intensively for their meat and fins.

The study, published today in the journal PLOS Biology, shows that the average body size and number of sharks and other marine predators -- vital to maintaining healthy ocean ecosystems -- fell significantly in proximity to cities with more than 10,000 people and associated fishing fleets.

The minimum distance from people and fishing which had no measurable effect was 1,250 kilometres. This is far further than previous studies have suggested and probably reflects the increased distances fishing boats can now travel. As a result, sharks were only observed at 12% of sites monitored.

Interestingly, researchers also found that sea surface temperature had a strong influence on predators' average body size, with a marked decrease at more than 28∼C. While this is consistent with normal biogeographic patterns -- it is known that many smaller species live in tropical waters, for example -- it could become a problem as global temperatures continue to rise.

Lead author Dr Tom Letessier, of ZSL's Institute of Zoology, said: "Human activity is now the biggest influence on sharks' distribution, overtaking every other ecological factor. Just 13% of the world's oceans can be considered 'wilderness' but sharks and other predators are much more common and significantly larger at distances greater than 1,250 kilometres from people. This suggests that large marine predators are generally unable to thrive near to people and is another clear example of the impact of human overexploitation on our seas."

To collect their data, the team analysed video footage taken at 1,041 sites across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, selected to test the biggest possible range of conditions and habitats. Sites varied in proximity to fish markets and human populations, with some close to cities and others up to 1,500 kilometres away. Sharks -- and other free-swimming predators -- were studied using cameras attached to cannisters filled with bait. In total the team recorded 23,200 animals representing 109 species. These included 841 individual sharks from 19 different species.

From monitoring the coral reefs that surround the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) to protecting the last breeding grounds of Critically Endangered angelsharks, ZSL is committed to preserving the oceans' habitats and the wildlife they sustain. Just one year away from the UN's Aichi Biodiversity targets end date, there remain considerable shortcomings in the current placement of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).

Dr Letessier added: "Our study also found that shallower water habitats, of depths less than 500 metres, were vital for marine predator diversity. We therefore need to identify sites that are both shallow and remote and prioritise them for conservation. However, there are still numerous shallow hotspots in the vicinity of human markets that are not appropriately protected, and this must change. Existing large, no-take MPAs need to be better enforced and extended to focus on the last refuges where these extraordinary animals remain abundant.

"Large marine predators -- and sharks in particular -- play a unique and irreplaceable role in the ocean ecosystem. They control populations of prey species, keep those populations healthy by removing sick or injured animals, and transport nutrients between loosely connected habitats over vast distances."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Zoological Society of London. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Tom B. Letessier, David Mouillot, Phil J. Bouchet, Laurent Vigliola, Marjorie C. Fernandes, Chris Thompson, Germain Boussarie, Jemma Turner, Jean-Baptiste Juhel, Eva Maire, M. Julian Caley, Heather J. Koldewey, Alan Friedlander, Enric Sala, Jessica J. Meeuwig. Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLOS Biology, 2019; 17 (8): e3000366 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Zoological Society of London. "Industrial fishing behind plummeting shark numbers: Research finds marine predators are significantly smaller and much rarer in areas closer to people." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 6 August 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190806142332.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
New study identifies a bizarre new species suggesting that giant marine lizards thrived before the asteroid wiped them out 66 million years ago.

A new species of mosasaur -- an ancient sea-going lizard from the age of dinosaurs -- has been found with shark-like teeth that gave it a deadly slicing bite.

Xenodens calminechari, from the Cretaceous of Morocco, had knifelike teeth that were packed edge to edge to make a serrated blade and resemble those of certain sharks. The cutting teeth let the small, agile mosasaur, about the size of a small porpoise, punch above its weight, cutting fish in half and taking large bites from bigger animals.

Dr Nick Longrich, Senior Lecturer at the Milner Centre for Evolution at the University of Bath and lead author on the paper, said: "66 million years ago, the coasts of Africa were the most dangerous seas in the world.

"Predator diversity there was unlike anything seen anywhere else on the planet. The new mosasaur adds to a rapidly growing list of marine reptiles known from the latest Cretaceous of Morocco, which at the time was submerged beneath a tropical sea.

"A huge diversity of mosasaurs lived here. Some were giant, deep-diving predators like modern sperm whales, others with huge teeth and growing up to ten meters long, were top predators like orcas, still others ate shellfish like modern sea otters -- and then there was the strange little Xenodens.

"They coexisted with long-necked plesiosaurs, giant sea turtles, and saber-toothed fish. The new mosasaur adds another dangerous predator to the mix."

The discovery also adds to the diversity of marine reptiles in the late Cretaceous. This suggests their diversity peaked just before an asteroid hit 66 million years ago, wiping out marine reptiles and the dinosaurs.
"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin
"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."
"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin
"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

"We're still learning how diverse the mosasaurs were," said Longrich. "And whenever we think we have them figured out, another one turns up."

The fauna lived in the million years before an asteroid hit the earth at the end of the Cretaceous period, ending the reign of the dinosaurs and wiping out 90 per cent or more of all species on Earth. The high diversity found in the new study suggests that the ecosystem wasn't in decline before the asteroid hit; instead the ecosystem seems to suggest that marine reptiles were expanding in diversity before they abruptly went extinct.

The teeth seen in Xenodens are unlike those of any other reptile. But Dr Longrich, who worked on fishing boats growing up in Alaska, had seen something similar before.

He said: "It reminded me of the teeth in the jaws of the sleeper sharks we'd sometimes catch while fishing halibut on my brother's boat. I remember seeing what those sharks could do- they'd carve huge bolts of flesh out of the halibut, almost cutting them in half."

The authors suggest that, similar to sleeper sharks and related dogfish sharks, the unusual jaws allowed the animal to punch above its weight, cutting small fish in half, carving pieces out of larger prey, and perhaps even scavenging on the carcasses of large marine reptiles.

But rather than being an extreme specialist, the teeth probably let Xenodens eat a huge range of prey -- "They're like the knives sold on those old late night TV commercial- they'll slice through anything," said Longrich.

Anne Schulp, researcher at Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden and Professor of Palaeontology at Utrecht University, and an author on the paper, said: "I'm blown away by the new discovery.

"I've been working on closely related mosasaurs for a decade or two now, and Xenodens shows this group managed to exploit yet another food source. They clearly were even more successful than we thought."

Dr Nathalie Bardet from the National Museum of Natural History in Paris said: "I have been working on mosasaurs for over 20 years and more specifically on those from the Maastrichtian Phosphates of Morocco which I am familiar with. I must admit that among the ten species that I know, this one has a so unusual and extraordinary dentition that at the beginning I thought it was a 'chimera' reconstructed with different fossils!"

Dr Nour-Eddine Jalil of the National Museum of Natural History in Paris and Universite Cadi Ayyad in Marrakech, said: "A mosasaur with shark teeth is a novel adaptation of mosasaurs so surprising that it looked like a fantastic creature out of an artist's imagination.

"Xenodens calminechari is further evidence of the extraordinary paleobiodiversity of the Phosphate Sea.

"It is as if nature is struggling to find all the combinations for an ever finer exploitation of food sources."

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bath. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Nicholas R. Longrich, Nathalie Bardet, Anne S. Schulp, Nour-Eddine Jalil. Xenodens calminechari gen. et sp. nov., a bizarre mosasaurid (Mosasauridae, Squamata) with shark-like cutting teeth from the upper Maastrichtian of Morocco, North Africa. Cretaceous Research, 2021; 104764 DOI: 10.1016/j.cretres.2021.104764
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bath. "Dinosaur-era sea lizard had teeth like a shark." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 19 January 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/01/210119102831.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Earth & Climate
New research led by Monterey Bay Aquarium reveals that even the revered white shark cannot escape the impacts of a changing ocean. The study, published in Scientific Reports, finds that unprecedented sightings of juvenile white sharks at the northern end of Monterey Bay signal a significant shift in the young white sharks' range.

Researchers conclude the northward range shift demonstrates the young sharks are being subjected to a loss of suitable thermal habitat, meaning water temperatures within their preferred temperature range are becoming harder to find.

"Nature has many ways to tell us the status quo is being disrupted, but it's up to us to listen," said Monterey Bay Aquarium Chief Scientist Dr. Kyle Van Houtan. "These sharks -- by venturing into territory where they have not historically been found -- are telling us how the ocean is being affected by climate change."

Aquarium scientists and their research partners began using electronic tags to learn about juvenile white sharks in southern California two decades ago when they were preparing to display the young white sharks to the public.

When the dramatic North Pacific marine heatwave hit the California coast between 2014-2016, these same researchers started to notice uncharacteristic sightings of juvenile white sharks in nearshore, central California waters near Aptos, California. This is farther north than young white sharks have ever been seen before as the animals historically remain in warmer waters in the southern California Current.

Water temperature in the Aptos area averages about 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13 degrees Celsius), but temperature extremes have become more common since the heatwave hit, rising as high as 69 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in August 2020.

Scientists conducted the research by collecting data from tags the Aquarium and its partners deployed on juvenile white sharks beginning in 2002 to see where the animals were spending most of their time.

The team analyzed 22 million electronic data records from 14 sharks and then compared these data to 38 years of ocean temperatures to map the cold edge of the animals' thermal preferences, or "niche."

The study charts the significant northward shift in the young white sharks' range.

Between 1982 and 2013, the northernmost edge of the juveniles' range was located near Santa Barbara (34∼ N). But after the marine heatwave, their range shifted dramatically north to Bodega Bay (38.5∼ N). Ever since, the young sharks' range limit has hovered near Monterey (36∼ N).

"After studying juvenile white shark behavior and movements in southern California for the last 16 years, it is very interesting to see this northerly shift in nursery habitat use," said Dr. Chris Lowe, a co-author of the study and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. "I think this is what many biologists have expected to see as the result of climate change and rising ocean temperatures. Frankly, I'll be surprised if we don't see this northerly shift across more species."

Because this shift took scientists by surprise, the team turned to novel sources of data such as community science and recreational fishing records to document this northward movement of the population.

"This study would not have been possible without contributions from our community scientists and treasured Aquarium volunteers," says Dr. Van Houtan. "Eric Mailander, a local firefighter, provided a decade of detailed logbook records of shark sightings, and volunteer Carol Galginaitis transcribed those hand-written data into an electronic database."

The researchers say this study reinforces what scientists have been saying for years: animals and the living world are revealing the impacts of climate change.

"White sharks, otters, kelp, lobsters, corals, redwoods, monarch butterflies -- these are all showing us that climate change is happening right here in our backyard," says Dr. Van Houtan. "It's time for us to take notice and listen to this chorus from nature. We know that greenhouse gas emissions are rapidly disrupting our climate and this is taking hold in many ways. Our study showed one example of juvenile white sharks appearing in Monterey Bay. But let's be clear: The sharks are not the problem. Our emissions are the problem. We need to act on climate change and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels."

Story Source:

Materials provided by Monterey Bay Aquarium. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Kisei R. Tanaka, Kyle S. Van Houtan, Eric Mailander, Beatriz S. Dias, Carol Galginaitis, John O＊Sullivan, Christopher G. Lowe & Salvador J. Jorgensen. North Pacific warming shifts the juvenile range of a marine apex predator. Scientific Reports, 2021 DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82424-9
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Climate change shrinks and shifts juvenile white shark range." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 9 February 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/02/210209083504.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Bans on shark fishing are only partially effective in protecting sharks, new research suggests.

Scientists from the University of Exeter, international conservation charity ZSL (Zoological Society of London) and Sri Lankan NGO Oceanswell examined the effects of a blanket ban on landing thresher sharks, brought in by the Sri Lankan government in 2012.

Information gathered from local fishers suggests the ban has stopped targeted fishing for the sharks -- but persistent "bycatch" (accidental catching) continues.

The study also found that bycatch appears to be widely unrecorded, partly due to "mistrust and confusion" amongst fishers.

"Sri Lanka's long-standing ban offers us an opportunity to assess the impacts of bans, which are increasingly being implemented globally to protect sharks," said lead author Claire Collins, of the University of Exeter and ZSL's Institute of Zoology.

"The ban has almost completely halted targeted fishing for these sharks, so in this sense it has been very successful.

"However, continued bycatch is a problem not only because of the direct impact on this vulnerable species, but also because it makes it tempting for fishers to get round the ban.

"Because it is easy to conceal threshers as other shark species, by cutting fins off before landing, fishers can sell them easily and the ban can be hard for authorities to enforce.

"Without addressing continued bycatch, there's always going to be a temptation to land these sharks -- especially because in Sri Lanka there is a strong market for shark meat as well as fins."

The study does not address ways to reduce bycatch, but methods could include local fishing bans in areas known for sharks, modifying fishing gear, and reducing the time gear is left in the water so sharks caught by accident have a higher chance of being freed before they die.

Oceanswell researchers gathered data from fishers over a ten-month period last year.

Despite many fishers reporting feeling disengaged with authorities in advance of the ban, compliance with it was very high among communities that used to rely on threshers for their livelihoods.

The study notes "unequal" impacts of the ban.

Unsurprisingly, fishers involved in targeted shark fishing were affected most severely, and the researchers say such impacts should be mitigated whenever possible.

Dr Ana Nuno, senior author of the paper, based at University of Exeter and NOVA University Lisbon (Portugal), added: "If we want conservation and fisheries policies to work, we need to get much better at understanding how they might impact resource users and take that into account during policy design.

"That's key to implementing robust policies that deliver positive outcomes for people and biodiversity."

The study was funded as part of the Bertarelli Programme in Marine Science.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Exeter. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Claire Collins, Tom Bech Letessier, Annette Broderick, Isuru Wijesundara, Ana Nuno. Using perceptions to examine human responses to blanket bans: The case of the thresher shark landing-ban in Sri Lanka. Marine Policy, 2020; 121: 104198 DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104198
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Exeter. "Shark fishing bans partially effective." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/12/201217090412.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
Plants & Animals
To date only the length of the legendary giant shark Megalodon had been estimated. But now, a new study led by the University of Bristol and Swansea University has revealed the size of the rest of its body, including fins that are as large as an adult human.

There is a grim fascination in determining the size of the largest sharks, but this can be difficult for fossil forms where teeth are often all that remain.

Today, the most fearsome living shark is the Great White, at over six metres (20 feet) long, which bites with a force of two tonnes.

Its fossil relative, the big tooth shark Megalodon, star of Hollywood movies, lived from 23 to around three million years ago, was over twice the length of a Great White and had a bite force of more than ten tonnes.

The fossils of the Megalodon are mostly huge triangular cutting teeth bigger than a human hand.

Jack Cooper, who has just completed the MSc in Palaeobiology at the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, and colleagues from Bristol and Swansea used a number of mathematical methods to pin down the size and proportions of this monster, by making close comparisons to a diversity of living relatives with ecological and physiological similarities to Megalodon.

The project was supervised by shark expert Dr Catalina Pimiento from Swansea University and Professor Mike Benton, a palaeontologist at Bristol. Dr Humberto Ferr車n of Bristol also collaborated.

Their findings are published today in the journal Scientific Reports.

Jack Cooper said: "I have always been mad about sharks. As an undergraduate, I have worked and dived with Great whites in South Africa -- protected by a steel cage of course. It's that sense of danger, but also that sharks are such beautiful and well-adapted animals, that makes them so attractive to study.

"Megalodon was actually the very animal that inspired me to pursue palaeontology in the first place at just six years old, so I was over the moon to get a chance to study it.

"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin
"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin"This was my dream project. But to study the whole animal is difficult considering that all we really have are lots of isolated teeth."

Previously the fossil shark, known formally as Otodus megalodon, was only compared with the Great White. Jack and his colleagues, for the first time, expanded this analysis to include five modern sharks.

Dr Pimiento said: "Megalodon is not a direct ancestor of the Great White but is equally related to other macropredatory sharks such as the Makos, Salmon shark and Porbeagle shark, as well as the Great white. We pooled detailed measurements of all five to make predictions about Megalodon."

Professor Benton added: "Before we could do anything, we had to test whether these five modern sharks changed proportions as they grew up. If, for example, they had been like humans, where babies have big heads and short legs, we would have had some difficulties in projecting the adult proportions for such a huge extinct shark.

"But we were surprised, and relieved, to discover that in fact that the babies of all these modern predatory sharks start out as little adults, and they don't change in proportion as they get larger."

Jack Cooper said: "This means we could simply take the growth curves of the five modern forms and project the overall shape as they get larger and larger -- right up to a body length of 16 metres."

The results suggest that a 16-metre-long Otodus megalodon likely had a head round 4.65 metres long, a dorsal fin approximately 1.62 metres tall and a tail around 3.85 metres high.

This means an adult human could stand on the back of this shark and would be about the same height as the dorsal fin.

The reconstruction of the size of Megalodon body parts represents a fundamental step towards a better understanding of the physiology of this giant, and the intrinsic factors that may have made it prone to extinction.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Bristol. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Related Multimedia:

Palaeoartist reconstruction of Megalodon
Journal Reference:

Jack A. Cooper, Catalina Pimiento, Humberto G. Ferr車n, Michael J. Benton. Body dimensions of the extinct giant shark Otodus megalodon: a 2D reconstruction. Scientific Reports, 2020; 10 (1) DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71387-y
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Bristol. "True size of prehistoric mega-shark finally revealed." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 3 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200903095637.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
They are some of the most iconic and unique-looking creatures in our oceans. While some may think they look a bit "odd," one thing researchers agree on is that little is known about hammerhead sharks. Many of the 10 hammerhead shark species are severely overfished worldwide for their fins and in need of urgent protection to prevent their extinction.

To learn more about a declining hammerhead species that is data poor but in need of conservation efforts, a team of researchers from Nova Southeastern University's (NSU) Save Our Seas Foundation Shark Research Center (SOSF SRC) and Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI), Fisher Finder Adventures, the University of Rhode Island and University of Oxford (UK), embarked on a study to determine the migration patterns of smooth hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna zygaena) in the western Atlantic Ocean. This shark, which can grow up to 14-feet (400 cm), remains one of the least understood of the large hammerhead species because of the difficulty in reliably finding smooth hammerheads to allow scientific study.

To learn about smooth hammerhead behavior, the research team satellite tagged juvenile hammerhead sharks off the US Mid-Atlantic coast and then tracked the sharks for up to 15 months. The sharks were fitted with fin-mounted satellite tags that reported the sharks' movements in near real time via a satellite link to the researchers.

"Getting long-term tracks was instrumental in identifying not only clear seasonal travel patterns, but importantly, also the times and areas where the sharks were resident in between their migrations," said Ryan Logan, Ph.D. student at NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, and first author of the newly published research. "This study provides the first high resolution, long term view of the movement behaviors and habitats used by smooth hammerhead sharks -- key information for targeting specific areas and times for management action to help build back this depleted species."

The researchers found that the sharks acted like snowbirds, migrating between two seasonally resident areas -- in coastal waters off New York in the Summer and off North Carolina in the Winter. Their residency times in these two locations coincided with two environmental factors: warmer surface water temperatures and areas with high productivity -- indicative of food rich areas.

"The high resolution movements data showed these focused wintering and summering habitats off North Carolina and New York, respectively, to be prime ocean "real estate" for these sharks and therefore important areas to protect for the survival of these near endangered animals," said Mahmood Shivji, Ph.D., director of NSU's GHRI and SOSF SRC, who oversaw the study.

Identifying such areas of high residency provides targets for designation as "Essential Fish Habitat" -- an official title established by the US Government, which if formally adopted can subsequently be subject to special limitations on fishing or development to protect such declining species.

The tracking data also revealed a second target for conservation. The hammerheads spent a lot of resident time in the winter in a management zone known as the Mid-Atlantic Shark Area (MASA) -- a zone already federally closed for seven-months per year (January 1 to July 31) to commercial bottom longline fishing to protect another endangered species, the dusky shark. However, the tracking data showed that the smooth hammerheads arrived in the MASA earlier in December, while this zone is still open to fishing.

"Extending the closure of the MASA zone by just one month, starting on December 1 each year, could reduce the fishing mortality of juvenile smooth hammerheads even more," said Shivji. "It's particularly gratifying to see such basic research not only improving our understanding of animal behavior in nature but also illuminating pathways for recovery of species and populations that have been overexploited so we can try and get back to a balanced ocean ecosystem."

The tracks of the smooth hammerheads (and other shark species) can be found here: http://www.ghritracking.org.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Nova Southeastern University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Ryan K. Logan, Jeremy J. Vaudo, Lara L. Sousa, Mark Sampson, Bradley M. Wetherbee, Mahmood S. Shivji. Seasonal Movements and Habitat Use of Juvenile Smooth Hammerhead Sharks in the Western North Atlantic Ocean and Significance for Management. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2020; 7 DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2020.566364
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
Nova Southeastern University. "New shark research targets a nearly endangered species." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 15 September 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/09/200915105936.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Plants & Animals
In a new study, University of Miami (UM) scientists found high concentrations of toxins linked to neurodegenerative diseases in the fins and muscles of 10 species of sharks. The research team suggests that restricting consumption of sharks can have positive health benefits for consumers and for shark conservation, since several of the sharks analyzed in the study are threatened with extinction due to overfishing.

Fins and muscle tissue samples were collected from 10 shark species found in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for concentrations of two toxins -- mercury and 汕-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). "Recent studies have linked BMAA to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)," said Deborah Mash, Professor of Neurology and senior author of the study.

Researchers at the UM Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and UM Miller School of Medicine detected concentrations of mercury and BMAA in the fins and muscles of all shark species at levels that may pose a threat to human health. While both mercury and BMAA by themselves pose a health risk, together they may also have synergistic toxic impacts.

"Since sharks are predators, living higher up in the food web, their tissues tend to accumulate and concentrate toxins, which may not only pose a threat to shark health, but also put human consumers of shark parts at a health risk," said the study's lead author Neil Hammerschlag, a research assistant professor at the UM Rosenstiel School and UM Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy.

Shark products including shark fins, cartilage and meat are widely consumed in Asia and globally in Asian communities, as a delicacy and as a source of traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, dietary supplements containing shark cartilage are consumed globally.

Recently scientists have found BMAA in shark fins and shark cartilage supplements. The neurotoxic methyl mercury has been known to bioaccumulate in sharks over their long lifespans.

About 16 percent of the world's shark species are threatened with extinction. The shark species sampled in this study range in threat status from least concern (bonnethead shark) to endangered (great hammerhead) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

"Our results suggest that humans who consume shark parts may be at a risk for developing neurological diseases." said Mash.

"People should be aware and consider restricting consumption of shark parts. Limiting the consumption of shark parts will have positive health benefits for consumers and positive conservation outcomes for sharks, many of which are threatened with extinction due in part to the growing high demand for shark fin soup and, to a lesser extent, for shark meat and cartilage products." said Hammerschlag.

Story Source:

Materials provided by University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Neil Hammerschlag, David Davis, Kiyo Mondo, Matthew Seely, Susan Murch, William Glover, Timothy Divoll, David Evers, Deborah Mash. Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin BMAA and Mercury in Sharks. Toxins, 2016; 8 (8): 238 DOI: 10.3390/toxins8080238
Cite This Page:
MLA
APA
Chicago
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science. "Shark fins and meat contain high levels of neurotoxins linked to Alzheimer's disease." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 29 August 2016. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/08/160829163529.htm>.

RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicin